{
  "political_security": "During Sikh rule, a number of habitational and military structures (such as forts) were built. The Darbar Sahib was reconstructed under Jassa Singh Ahluwalia in 1765 after it was destroyed. The Darshani Deori of the site was built in 1776 and the parkarma in 1784. The site was renovated by being embellished with gold-plated copper-sheets and marble starting in 1803 under Maharaja Ranjit Singh, with decorative artwork. During the reign of Ranjit Singh, various gardens, havelis, gurdwaras, and śivalas (temples) were constructed. During the reign of Maharaja Karam Singh and his successors of Patiala, a unique Phulkian style of Sikh architecture developed, characterized by being influenced by Bengali roofs rather than onion-style domes. Some gurdwaras originally rebuilt in this Phulkian style include Gurdwara Qila Mubarak, Bathinda, Gurdwara Fatehgarh Sahib and Gurdwara Tilak Asthan (Garhi Sahib) in Chamkaur, and Gurdwara Sri Patshahi Nauvin Sahib Qila Bahadurgarh. However, most of these gurdwaras have since been rebuilt by Kar Seva renovators and lost their Phulkian appearance.",
  "economy_trade": "Amritsar is the second-largest city and district of Punjab. It is also one of the fastest-growing cities of Punjab. In the mid-1980s the city was famous for its textile industry. Amritsar's trade and industry faced a blow during militancy period in 1980s, but there are still many textile mills, knitting units and embroidery factories functional in the city. It is famous for its pashmina shawls, woolen clothes, blankets, etc. Among handicrafts, the craft of the Thatheras of Jandiala Guru in Amritsar district got enlisted on UNESCO's List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2014, and the effort to revive this craft under the umbrella of Project Virasat is among India's biggest government-sponsored craft revival programs. Tourism and hospitality have recently become the backbone of local economy due to heavy tourist arrivals. Hundreds of small and some large hotels have sprung up to cater to the increased tourist inflow. Restaurants, taxi operators, local shopkeepers have all benefited from the tourist boom.",
  "architecture": "In the Sikh tradition, Guru Ram Das, the fourth Sikh guru, is credited with founding the holy city of Amritsar in 1574. Two versions of stories exist regarding the land where Guru Ram Das settled. In one, based on a Gazetteer record, the land was purchased, with Sikh donations, for 700 rupees from the owners of the village of Tung.\nAccording to historical Sikh records, the site was chosen by Guru Amar Das and called Guru Da Chakk. The latter guru had asked Ram Das to find land to start a new town, and to create a man-made pool as its central point. After his coronation, Guru Ram Das in 1574, who faced hostile opposition from the sons of Guru Amar Das, founded the town; it was named after him as \"Ramdaspur\". He first completed the pool, and built his new official Guru centre and home next to it. He invited merchants and artisans from other parts of India to settle into the new town with him. The town expanded during the time of Guru Arjan Dev, financed by donations and constructed by volunteers. The town grew to become the city of Amritsar. After the son of Guru Ram Das built the gurdwara Harmandir Sahib, the pool area developed further as a temple complex. In 1604 Guru Ram Das's son installed the scripture of Sikhism inside the new temple.\nThe period and achievements of construction between 1574 and 1604 are described in Mahima Prakash Vartak, a semi-historical Sikh hagiographic text likely composed in 1741. It is the earliest known document dealing with the lives of all the ten Gurus.\n\nIn 1762 and 1766–1767, Ahmad Shah of the Durrani Empire invaded the Sikh Confederacy. He  besieged Amritsar, massacred the populace, and destroyed the city.\n\nDuring the time of the Sikh Empire, in 1822 Maharaja Ranjit Singh fortified the city, starting from a wall at Katra Maha Singh area.\nAmong the Katras (fortified residential societies) constructed by Maharaja Ranjit Singh within the city were the following:\n\nKatra Moti Ram\nKatra Kanwar Kharak Singh (also known as 'Katra Nikkai')\nKatra Fateh Singh Kallianwala\nKatra Ahluwalia\n\nLater, Sher Singh continued with construction of the city wall, adding twelve gates. He also had built a fort named Dhoor Kot; its fortification were yards broad and 7 yards high. The circumference of the walled city was around five miles. The twelve gates constructed during this era were known as (including later renamings):\n\nLahori Darwaza (Lahori Gate)\nKhazana Darwaja (Khazana Gate)\nDeori Hakiman (Gate Hakeema/Darwaza Hakeema Wala)\nGilwali Darwaza – no longer extant\nDarwaza Rangar Nanglian (Gate Bhagatawala) – no longer extant\nDarwaza Ramgarhian (Chattiwind Gate) – later restored\nDarwaza Ahluwalia (Darwaza Gheo Mandi) – was no longer extant but has since been restored\nDoburji Darwaza (Sultanwind Gate or Delhi Darwaza)\nDeorhi Kalan\nDarwaza Rambagh\nDeorhi Shazada (Hathi Darwaza/Darwaza Sehzada)\nDarwaza Lohgarh – no longer extant\nWhen the British annexed Punjab in 1849, Amritsar was a walled city. The British built a thirteenth gate in 1866 known as Hall Gate, Neighborhood in Amritsar, Punjab.\n\nThe British rulers would later demolish some of the walls and gates or reconstruct some. An entire new wall of the city was completed in 1885. Many surviving gates have since been renamed and no longer bear their mid-19th century names, while others have since been demolished.\n\nSikh architecture is a distinctive style of architecture that developed under the Sikh Confederacy and later flourished during the Sikh Empire in the 18th and 19th centuries, primarily in the Punjab region. Due to its progressive nature, Sikh architecture has continued to evolve over time, giving rise to several new branches and influencing various contemporary architectural styles. Although Sikh architecture was originally developed as part of the religious and cultural expression within Sikhism, its aesthetic richness and symbolic elements have led to its adoption in many secular and non-religious buildings as well, admired for their beauty and structural harmony. 300 years ago, Sikh architecture was distinguished for its many curves and straight lines; Keshgarh Sahib and the Harmandir Sahib (Golden Temple) are prime examples of traditional Sikh architecture.\n\nThe manifestation of Sikh architecture is sourced to the religion itself and relevant tenets and principles influencing the religious spaces associated with the community. Studying historical Sikh architecture is rendered difficult due to how little of it dating to the gurus' period remains extant presently. In Punjab, architecture traditionally was constructed using small and thin brick (made from local-earth and low-fired in wood-burning kilns to be fully baked) rather than stone. Binding of the bricks to one another tended to be done by mud-mortar as lime-mortar was a luxury that had to be brought from Rajasthan, usually used for mud-mortared joints. More expensive mud-mortar structures had lime plaster and were decorated with murals. Only the most expensive building projects used lime-mortar throughout the structure. Due to the usage of mud-mortar, most historical Sikh structures did not survive the passage of time and due to the fact that the Punjab was subject to a series of invasions, destroying much of its architecture as a result. During Sikh-rule, such as in the 19th century, many original sites were rebuilt and renovated by Sikh rulers, destroying the original guru-era structures but building grander sites in their place. The destruction of historical Sikh architecture and edifices under the guise of renovation continued into the 20th and 21st centuries, especially at the most pivotal sites. Neglected sites (such as the Thatte Khera tank complex) are more likely to have surviving Sikh historical architecture as a result and textual evidence can be consulted to form an understanding of the historical evolution of Sikh architecture. \nSikh architecture was influenced by Mughal architecture, which itself was influenced by Rajput architecture. However, differences between the three architectural styles exist in regards to embellishment and emphasis, expanse and shrinkage, and detail and refinement. Sikh architecture was heavily influenced by elements of Mughal and Islamic styles. Features such as the onion dome, frescoes, inlay work, and multi-foil arches are derived from the Mughal period, particularly during the reign of Shah Jahan. In contrast, features like chattris, oriel windows, bracket-supported eaves at the string-course, and decorative friezes reflect the influence of Rajput architecture.\n\nSince the era of Guru Nanak, congregations of Sikhs constructed modest halls (Dharamsals) for religious functions. The dharamsals were simple constructions that housed a gathering space for the local community (sangat) to listen to the guru's discourses, to meet others, eat together (langar), and to sing hymns. Later gurus had baolis (stepwells, notably the one in Goindwal built by Guru Amar Das) and sarovars (tanks or pools, notably by Guru Ram Das and Guru Arjan) constructed along trade-routes to spread the growing religion and to practice isnaan (bathing). Dharamsals were succeeded by gurdwaras that housed the community's sacred scripture compiled by Guru Arjan, the most notable of which is the Darbar Sahib in Amritsar. \nGuru Arjan constructed a number of temple tanks. His father Guru Ram Das had constructed the tank of Amritsar (Amrit Sarovar) but it was Arjan's idea to construct a central shrine edifice at the site, designing the shrine's architecture himself, consisting of a causeway to the domed shrine placed in a natural depression (showcasing humility), which had four entry points. The project to build the Darbar Sahib shrine at Amritsar was a rallying point for the early Sikh community of the time. A mason was hired and brick-kilns were utilized for the project. However, the current gold and marble construction dates to the reign of Maharaja Ranjit Singh (renovated between 1802 and 1839) and may have little in common with the original edifice constructed under Guru Arjan, with the original building being blown up by invading Afghans in 1762.\n\nEarly British authors, such as Thomas Henry Thornton, wrote disparaging reports on Sikh architecture, which impacted its reception and these views continue to the present-day. After colonization, European styles of architecture was introduced, such as Classical and Victorian Gothic. Furthermore, the Indo-Saracenic style developed, being promoted by the British. All of these styles competed with indigenous architectural styles in the princely states. Maharaja Jagatjit Singh of Kapurthala, a Francophile who travelled to Europe, utilized Western architectural styles with French influences.\n\nApart from religious buildings, Sikh architecture includes secular forts, bungas (residential places), palaces, and colleges. The religious structure is called gurdwara (a place where the Guru dwells). The word gurdwara is a compound of guru (guide or master) and dwara (gateway or seat). So, it has an architectural connotation. Sikh gurdwaras are generally commemorative buildings connected with the ten gurus in some way, or with places and events of historical significance. Some examples are Gurdwara Dera Sahib (encampment place), in Batala in Gurdaspur district. It was erected in memory of the brief stay of Guru Nanak along with his companions on the occasion of his marriage. Gurdwara Shahid Ganj (Martyrdom Memorial) in Muktsar in Faridkot district commemorates the cremation spot of Sikhs who were killed in a battle between Guru Gobind Singh and the Mughals in 1705. The Gurdwara Shish Mahal (Palace of Mirrors) in Kiratpur, located in the Ropar district of Punjab, marks the birthplace of the eighth Sikh Guru, Guru Har Krishan. The key room in the gurdwara is the Darbar Sahib Hall, which houses the scripture and congregation.\nThere are over 500 historical gurdwaras across India and Pakistan, many of which are associated with significant events in the lives of the Sikh Gurus.\nThere are four broad categories regarding shape and layout of Sikh shrine architecture:\n\nsquare\nrectangular\noctagonal (ex. Gurdwara Baba Atal in Amritsar)\ncruciform (ex. Gurdwara Nanak Jhira in Bidar, Karnataka)\n\nGurdwara\nDharamsaal\nBaradari\nSarai/Niwas\nQila\nBurj\nBunga\nSamadhi\n\nAccording to Zulfiqar Ali Kalhoro, studying the samadhs of Pothohar, states that Sikh samadhis were often decorated with frescoes, which usually depict both Sikh and Hindu themes, such as the Sikh gurus or Indic deities. During Sikh-rule, samadhis tended to be costly, grand structures with ribbed domes and elaborate paintings. However, Sikh samadhis erected during British-rule tended to be simpler, with fewer frescoes and shikhara or squat domes.\n\nMany priceless Sikh heritage sites (including their architecture) have been destroyed or altered beyond recognition under the guise of \"kar seva\" renovations by various institutions and groups in recent-times, especially vulnerable are Sikh heritage sites in both India and Pakistan according to one scholar, who states it is due to \"...the lack of will on the part of the authorities concerned to preserve them\". An example of these haphazard and destructive renovations is an incident involving the top section of the historical Darshani Deori gatehouse at the Gurdwara Tarn Taran Sahib complex, which was demolished by Kar Seva groups in March 2019. Many groups are rushing to digitize what historical architecture and structures remains for posterity before they are lost, such as Panjab Digital Library. In July 2021, the SGPC launched a project to archive and document the heritage structures of the community and have set up the old doors of the Golden Temple as museum display when they were replaced. However, around the same time the SGPC denied the importance of a historical Sikh structure discovered underground near the Golden Temple complex, which experts at the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) deemed as 'historic'. Also, the SGPC made plans to raze a historical building known as Guru Ram Das Sarai, even in the face of criticism of the decision by experts. As many as ninety percent of Sikh heritage monuments have been destroyed in Punjab in the name of renovation and kar seva. Many historical Sikh structures that were destroyed by Kar Seva renovations include original houses of the Sikh gurus and their relatives.\nAccording to the Sikh historian, Harjinder Singh Dilgeer:\n\nThough kar seva babas had been renovating gurudwaras ever since anyone can remember, it was after Operation Bluestar, when the Sikh community donated generously for the massive rebuilding of the Golden Temple premises, that 'babas' began to appreciate the money-making opportunities such rebuilding threw up. The trend then spread across Punjab and in the last two decades, old heritage structures began to be demolished and replaced by garish, opulent marble gurudwaras. These pseudo-babas are armed with so much money but they spend it foolishly on rebuilding instead of restoration, because they are absolutely ignorant about the historical value of these old monuments. Somewhere along the line, the original, unpretentious Sikh architecture has begun to be perceived as something to be ashamed of. Our Gurus were simple, down-to-earth men of the soil, and their buildings reflect the simplicity and harmony which Sikhism is all about.\nAccording to Sikh scholar, Gurtej Singh, on who is to blame for the plight of Sikh historical heritage:Whether it is the Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee or the Akal Takht or even the political Akali Dal which draws its strength from the former two, there is no appreciation for our heritage. Scholars like us do not matter in the scheme of things, because we obstruct their commercial aspirations. The SGPC patronises these babas and they do not realise that they are converting history into mythology by destroying historical evidence.Peter Bance, when evaluating the status of Sikh sites in present-day India, where the majority of Sikhs live today, criticizes the destruction of the originality of 19th-century-era Sikh sites under the guise of \"renovation\", whereby historical structures are toppled and new buildings take their former place. An example cited by him of sites losing their originality relates to nanakshahi bricks, which are characteristic of Sikh architecture from the 19th century, being replaced by renovators of historical Sikh sites in India by marble and gold. Bance advocates that a grassroots movement advocating for the proper restoration and preservation of historical Sikh sites and their original architecture is necessary, which works together with private enthusiasts and government bodies in-cooperation with one another. Bance further claims that a lack of willpower rather than a lack of funds is responsible for the poor conservation of Sikh historical sites. Bance believes that the way forward in the modern-age to conserve Sikh heritage must be a digital approach, where social networking and technology is utilized to share research, build-up archives, and promote tourism to these sites. Increased tourism has the potential to increase efforts to preserve and restore Sikh heritage sites. Bance uses the Instagram platform to bring light to forgotten Sikh heritage lying in Pakistan with the wider community, using engagements there to generate social awareness and passion. Through his Instagram account, Bance has been contacted by persons interested in restoring Sikh heritage sites, which have allowed them to be connected with others who specialize in this field. Furthermore, he claims that on a weekly-basis hundreds of members of the general public from both India and Pakistan contact him through social media requesting him to visit their locality to document the Sikh heritage located there, as they lack the know-how on how to do this themselves.\nShahid Shabbir is a Pakistani historian and journalist who has documented countless Sikh heritage sites (most often neglected, dilapidated, or abandoned) located in his country, including their extant artwork and architecture. Sikh architecture remains a seldom studied or researched subject.\nVirasati Asthan Seva is a Sikh charity dedicated toward preserving historical Sikh sites, known as Asthāns. Some of their current restoration projects are the Havelī Kavī Santokh Singh in Kaithal, Haryana and Gurdwara Bābā Bikram Singh Bedi in Amritsar, Punjab.",
  "daily_life_culture": "According to 2011 Census of India, Hinduism and Sikhism are the main religions of the Amritsar city followed by 49.36% and 48.00% of the population, respectively. Christianity is followed by 1.23% and Islam 0.51%. Around 0.9% of the population of the city stated 'No Particular Religion' or other religion.\nAmritsar is the holiest city in Sikhism and about 30 million people visit it each year for pilgrimage.\n\nAt the time of the 2011 census, 91.12% of the population spoke Punjabi and 7.90% Hindi as their first language.\n\nBBK DAV College for Women\nD.A.V College\nD.A.V Public School\nDelhi Public School\nGovernment Medical College\nGuru Nanak Dev University\nKhalsa College\nKhalsa College of Law\nIndian Institute of Management\nSpring Dale Senior School\n\nThe Sikhs are adherents to Sikhism, the fifth largest organized religion in the world, with around 25 million adherents. Sikh History is around 500 years and in that time the Sikhs have developed unique expressions of art and culture which are influenced by their faith and synthesize traditions from many other cultures depending on the locality of the adherents of the religion. Sikhism is the only religion that originated in the Punjab region with all other religions coming from outside Punjab (with the possible exception of Punjabi Hinduism since the oldest Hindu scripture – the Rig Veda – was composed in the Punjab region.  Some other religions, like Jainism, may also claim to have originated in Punjab since Jain symbolism has been found among artifacts of the Indus Valley Civilization).  All the Sikh gurus, many saints, and many of the martyrs in Sikh history were from Punjab and from the Punjabi people (as well as other parts of the Indian subcontinent). \nPunjabi culture and Sikhism are mistakenly considered inseparably intertwined. \"Sikh\" properly refers to adherents of Sikhism as a religion, strictly not an ethnic group. However, because Sikhism has seldom sought converts, most Sikhs share strong ethno-religious ties, therefore it is a common stereotype that all Sikhs share the same ethnicity. Many countries, such as the U.K., therefore recognize Sikh as a designated ethnicity on their censuses. The American non-profit organization United Sikhs has fought to have Sikhs included on the U.S. census as well, arguing that Sikhs \"self-identify as an 'ethnic minority'\" and believe \"that they are more than just a religion\".\n\nThere is a common misconception that all Sikhs belong to the Punjab region.  The religion's birthplace of Punjab itself has been called \"India’s melting pot\", and many other parts of Northern India due to the heavy influence of invading cultures, such as Mughal and Persian, that mirrors the confluence of rivers from which the region gets its name (from Persian, \"panj\" پنج meaning \"five\" and \"-āb\" آب meaning water thus meaning land of the five waters).  Thus, Sikh culture is to a large extent a result of groups of various cultures uniting together, thus forming a unique one.\nSikhism has forged a unique form of architecture which Bhatti describes as being \"inspired by Guru Nanak’s creative mysticism\" such that Sikh architecture \"is a mute harbinger of holistic humanism based on pragmatic spirituality\".  The keynote of Sikh architecture is the Gurdwara which is the personification of the \"melting pot\" of Indian cultures, full of Mughal, Aryan and Persian influences.\nThe reign of the Sikh Empire was the single biggest catalyst in the creation of a uniquely Sikh form of expression, with Maharajah Ranjit Singh patronising the building of forts, palaces, bungs (residential places), colleges, etc. that can be said to be of the Sikh Style.  The \"jewel in the crown\" of the Sikh Style is the Harmandir Sahib.\nSikh culture and identity are heavily influenced by militaristic motifs, with Khanda being the most obvious; thus it is no surprise that the majority of Sikh artifacts, independent of the relics of the Gurus, have a military theme.  This motif is again evident in the Sikh festivals of Hola Mohalla and Vasakhi which feature marching and practicing displays of valor, respectively.\nThe art, culture, identity, and society of the Sikhs have been merged with the different localities and ethnicities of different Sikhs into categories such as 'Agrahari Sikhs', 'Dakhni Sikhs' and 'Assamese Sikhs'; however there has emerged a niche cultural phenomenon that can be described as 'Political Sikh'.  The art of prominent diaspora Sikhs such as Amarjeet Kaur Nandhra, and Amrit and Rabindra Kaur Singh (The Singh Twins), is partly informed by their Sikh spirituality and influence.\n\nPhysical fitness is a major part of Sikhism, having been a major part of the religion in the context of military preparedness from the time of the gurus. This saw the community become termed as a martial race by the British during the colonial era (see also: Sikhism and the British Empire).\n\nDusenbery (2014) states that Punjabi Sikhs form the majority of the Sikh population. He notes that \"some Sindhis and other South Asians have been affiliated at the margins as Nanakpanthis (‘followers of Nanak’s path’) or Sehajdhari (‘slow adopter’) Sikhs\" but in the main, \"the Sikh Panth has remained largely a Punjabi affair\".  However, the Sikh community is varied and includes people who speak the Pashto language, the Sindhi language, the Telugu language and many more. The many communities following Sikhism are detailed below.\n\nThe Sikhs of Afghanistan have a unique culture which has elements of the culture of Afghanistan. Tatla (2014) states that there were 3,000 Sikhs in Afghanistan in his book The Sikh Diaspora which was published in 2014.\n\nYogi Bhajan is credited with raising awareness of Sikhism amongst the non-Asian community of the United States of America. This community is known as the white Sikh community which practices Sikhism and maintains a distinct culture.\n\nThe presence of Sikhism has existed in Assam for over 200 years. The community traces its origins to the times of Maharaja Ranjit Singh who took his army to Assam and put some influence of the religion towards the locals. According to the 2001 census, there were 22,519 Sikhs in Assam, out of which 4,000 are Assamese Sikhs.\nAssamese Sikhs follow the Sikh religion and celebrate Sikh festivals. They also celebrate cultural festivals such as Magh Bihu and wear traditional Assamese dress. Their language is the Assamese language.\n\nAgrahari Sikh is a Sikh community found in eastern India including the states of West Bengal, Bihar and Jharkhand. Agrahari Sikhs, also known as Bihari Sikhs, have existed for centuries in Bihar and Jharkhand.\nBihari Sikhs share their culture with the local Bihari community. The men generally wear the local dhoti and women wear the sari. They also celebrate cultural festivals such as the Chath festival.\n\nDakhni Sikhs are from the Deccan Plateau in India located within the states of Maharashtra, Telegana and Andhra Pradesh. The traditional dress of women is the sari. The native languages of Dakhni Sikhs include Marathi and Telugu.\n\nEthnic Kashmiri Sikhs speak the Kashmiri language and observe Kashmiri culture. They trace their religious heritage to the influence of Sikh soldiers who settled in Kashmir under Maharaja Ranjit Singh's rule in 1819. However, the soldiers permanently settled in Kashmir.\n\nPunjabi Sikhs follow the Punjabi culture. Their traditional dress includes the Punjabi Salwar Suit, Punjabi Tamba and Kurta, Punjabi juti and Patiala salwar.\nIn addition to the Sikh festivals  using the Nanakshahi calendar, Punjabi Sikhs observe traditional Punjabi festivals using the Punjabi calendar.\n\nIn addition to celebrating Sikh festivals, Sindhi Sikhs celebrate cultural festivals such as Cheti Chand, the Sindhi new year. Sindhi Sikhs speak the Sindhi language. Khalsa Sikhs historically had a stronghold in Kandhra, Khairpur during the reign of the Talpur Mirs (1775–1955). However, most Sikhs in Sindh are followers of the Udasi, Sewapanthi, and Nanakpanthi sects. Only around 8,000–10,000 people in present-day Sindh are mainstream, orthodox Khalsa Sikh. The vast majority belong to the aforementioned sects whom may practice varying degrees of religious kinship and syncretism with Hinduism and Sufism. Udasis are generally concentrated in northern Sindh whilst Nanakpanthis can be found throughout the region except in areas of the Rajasthani cultural sphere (Dhatki-speaking areas) who practice a more mainstream, non-syncretic, and differentiated form of Hinduism. Nanakpanth and Udasipanth are different sects of Sikhism, with a major difference being that Udasis adopt a life-hood of celibacy whilst Nanakpanthis freely marry and bear children. Another Sikh sect, the Jagiasi, who claim to have been founded by the younger son of Guru Nanak named Lakhmi Das, were also historically prevalent in Sindh, especially during the period of Baba Gurupat, who was a descendant of Guru Nanak. Baba Gurupat conducted missionary works in Sindh and founded many Jagiasu tikanas (seats; a term for a place of worship in many Sikh sects) in the region, specifically in Khairpur, Hyderabad, Halani, and Kandyaro. Sindhis may have been converting to Sikhism ever since the time of Guru Nanak, who traveled to the region. Janamsakhi literature narrate that Guru Nanak traveled to Shikarpur, possibly as far as Sukkur. Sindhi women learnt the Gurmukhi script in-order to understand the Guru Granth Sahib. A lot of converts to Sikhism came from the Amil caste. The Chief Khalsa Diwan sent out orthodox Sikh missionaries to Sindh in the 1930s to preach towards Sehajdharis (literally \"slow adopters\"), which dominated the landscape of Sikhism in Sindh. The result was the number of Keshdhari (those who keep uncut hair) Sikhs recorded increasing from 1,000 in the 1901 census to over 39,000 in the 1941 census. Sant Thahriya Singh was a prominent Sindhi Sikh saint of the 20th century, and many gurdwaras are constructed in his name in the region.\n\nThere are Sikh communities in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra who converted to Sikhism centuries ago.\nThe Sikhs comprise Banjara and Satnami. The process of blending the religion into southern India for the Sikligars began at the time of the 10th Sikh Guru Gobind Singh, who came to the Deccan and died in 1708 at Nanded (Maharashtra).\nIt all came by the Sikligars as they came to southern India as expert arms-making camp followers of the tenth Guru. Sikligar is a compound of the Persian words `saiqal` and `gar` meaning a polisher of metal. The traditional occupation of the Sikligars is crafting kitchen implements.\nBanjaras are a nomadic tribe who traditionally travelled with merchandise and are found across a large swathe of northern India, as well as in the south. Sikh Banjaras too travelled with armies of the past supplying them with provisions."
}