{
  "political_security": "The few surviving structures from before the Delhi Sultanate period include Agrasen ki Baoli, Surajkund reservoir, Lal Kot and Qila Rai Pithora. There were several temples built during this period, remnants of which are still present in Qutb complex. These were built by the Tomaras and Chahamans (Chauhans) Rajput dynasties.\n\nThe Delhi Sultanate ruled the city between 1206 and 1526. Their rule saw the development of early Indo-Islamic architecture, the most prominent being the Qutb Minar complex, a group of monuments surrounding the Qutb Minar. This period also saw building of many forts and cities like Siri Fort, Tughlaqabad and Feroz Shah Kotla. Many tombs were built around this period which are still present in many locations like Qutb Minar complex, Hauz Khas Complex and Lodi Gardens.\n\nMughal Architecture emerged as a form of Indo-Islamic architecture during the rule of the Mughal Empire. Mughal architecture is characterized by large bulbous onion domes, the use of white marble and red sandstone, delicate ornamentation work, and large buildings surrounded by gardens on all four sides.\nThe Humayun's Tomb is the first notable example of Mughal architecture in Delhi. Except for a few architectures like Humayun's Tomb and Purana Qila, most of the architectural work of this period was done in Shah Jahan's time or later. This period also saw building of 18th century Astronomical Observatory called Jantar Mantar.\nAnother important achievement of this period was building of Mughal gardens. Its design was inspired by Persian Char Bagh Gardens. Some gardens built during Mughal period are garden built in front of Humayun's Tomb, Roshanara Bagh, Qudsia Bagh and Garden built in Safdarjang's tomb complex.",
  "economy_trade": "Delhi is the largest commercial center in northern India. As of 2016 recent estimates of the economy of the Delhi urban area have ranged from $370 billion to $400 billion (PPP metro GDP) ranking it either the most or second-most productive metro area of India. The nominal GSDP of the NCT of Delhi for 2016–17 was estimated at ₹6,224 billion (US$65 billion), 13% higher than in 2015–16. Oxford Economics Global Cities index 2024 ranked Delhi as best city in India and 108th best city in the world in Economics Category.\nAs per the Economic survey of Delhi (2005–2006), the tertiary sector contributes 70.95% of Delhi's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 25.20% and 3.85% contributions, respectively. Delhi's workforce constitutes 32.82% of the population, and increased by 52.52% between 1991 and 2001. Delhi's unemployment rate decreased from 12.57% in 1999–2000 to 4.63% in 2003. In December 2004, 636,000 people were registered with various employment exchange programmes in Delhi.\nIn 2018 the total workforce in national and state governments and the quasi-government sector was 594,000, and the private sector employed 273,000. Key service industries are information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media and tourism. Construction, power, health and community services and real estate are also important to the city's economy. Delhi has one of India's largest and fastest growing retail industries. Manufacturing also grew considerably as consumer goods companies established manufacturing units and headquarters in the city. Delhi's large consumer market and the availability of skilled labour has also attracted foreign investment. In 2001, the manufacturing sector employed 1,440,000 workers and the city had 129,000 industrial units.\n\nThe economy of Delhi is the 12th largest among states and union territories of India. The Nominal GSDP of the  NCR was estimated at 272.603 Billion and the Nominal GSDP of the NCT of Delhi for 2023-24 was estimated at ₹11.07 lakh crore (US$120 billion) recording an annual growth of 9.2%. Growth rate in 2014-15 was 9.2%. In 2020-21, the tertiary sector contributed 85% of Delhi's GSDP followed by the secondary and primary sectors at 12% and 3% respectively. The services sector recorded an annual growth of 7.3%.\nDelhi is the largest commercial centre in northern India. As of 2021, recent estimates of the economy of the urban area of Delhi have ranged from $521.5 billion (PPP metro GDP) and it has $272.603 billion as (Nominal GDP) ranking it either the most or second-most productive metro area of India.\nIn recent times, a lot of economic, manufacturing and business activities have been attracted by Noida, Gurugram, Greater Noida, Ghaziabad, Meerut and Faridabad.\nA large number of population of Delhi travels daily between Noida, Greater Noida and Gurugram for jobs.\n\nManufacturing grew considerably as consumer goods companies established manufacturing units and headquarters in the city. Delhi's large consumer market and the availability of skilled labour has also attracted foreign investment. Delhi contributes 4.94% to the total GDP of the country. In 2001, the manufacturing sector employed 1,440,000 workers and the city had 129,000 industrial units.\n\nKey service industries are information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media and tourism. Construction, power, health and community services and real estate are also important to the city's economy.\n\nDelhi has one of India's largest and fastest growing retail industries.\n\nAs with other regions of India, the IT industry has been expanding in Delhi. Although not as robust as the IT industry in some of India's southern states, it still hosts significant IT companies such as Google India, Teleperformance India, HCL Technologies, SAP Labs India, Tata Consultancy Services, Cinfoways and SAS Institute India. Its satellite cities that fall within the NCR, such as Noida in Uttar Pradesh or Gurgaon in Haryana, are also home to a strong IT sector. According to the Industrial Policy for Delhi 2010-21, the Delhi government hopes to increase investments into and further develop the state's IT and ITeS industries. Delhi's government institutions, well-developed infrastructure, increasing workforce and business-friendly culture makes it an ideal location for such an expansion of the IT sector.\n\nThe real estate sector has been another growing industry within the NCR. It boomed in the 2000s and many Indians, induced by the soaring property prices, decided to invest in real estate, especially in the growing satellite cities of Gurgaon, Noida and Greater Noida. At the real estate market's peak between 2001 and 2007, one could expect 20-30% annual returns or double their investment in about 3–5 years. By 2013 however, demand for real estate began to decline, reaching an all-time low in 2016. With sales plummeting and real estate firms ridden with debt, developers such as Unitech, Jaypee Infratech Ltd. and the Amrapali Group have slowed progress on their development projects since they lacked the necessary working capital.\n\nIn response to the crisis, the Parliament of India passed the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 to protect home-buyers and the real estate industry. The act created the Real Estate Regulatory Authority (RERA) which is responsible for regulating the real estate industry and for addressing disputes for non-delivery. The act also makes it mandatory to register real projects with a clear deadline. This was followed by the Modi government's demonetization of ₹500 and ₹1000 banknotes. One of the stated aims of such an action was to curtail the widespread use of black money in real estate transactions.\nGreater compliance and transparency following the establishment of the RERA has had a stabilizing effect on the real estate market. Although the RERA has made it harder for new projects to launch, curtailing the supply-side of the real estate industry, demand has been increasing. For now, except for Gurgaon which is experiencing marginal real estate growth, home values in the Delhi NCR region remain stable.\n\nAs per the Economic survey of Delhi (2022–2023), Delhi's workforce constitutes 33.28% of the population (during 2011). The estimated employment rate in Delhi during the period July 2020-June 2021 was 93.7. Unemployment rate in Delhi during aforesaid period was 6.3. Female workers constitute a less percentage of workers during 2011 and it approximated up to 15% of workers in Delhi. The major shares of workers in Delhi were in the category of other workers, which includes all industrial and tertiary sector activities at it constitutes at 95%.\nThe workforce participation rate for Delhi residents aged above 15 years was 40.8% in 2015-16, lower than the 41.8% recorded in 2012-13. Delhi's workforce participation rate is lower than the national average of 50.5%.\nThe Delhi chief minister launched a job portal \"Rozgar Bazar\" for recruiters and job aspirants during the COVID-19 pandemic.",
  "architecture": "The architecture of Delhi dates back more than a thousand years. As the capital of several empires of India, including the Rajput kingdom, Delhi Sultanate, Mughal Empire, and British Raj, the city of Delhi has been a centre for art and architecture.\n\nAfter Delhi was declared the site for a new capital of India, George V laid the foundation of New Delhi, which would serve as the capital. The British invited Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker to design the government buildings. This area would also be called Lutyens' Delhi in honor of the architect. Members of Lutyens' team of architects included Walter Sykes George, Arthur Gordon Shoosmith and Henry Medd. It is reported that Lutyens was reluctant to incorporate Indian features in his style, but later conceded.\n\nThe Supreme Court of India was designed by Ganesh Bhikaji Deolalikar in the same style as that of the other major buildings in Lutyens' Delhi. However, modernist architecture became prevalent in Delhi as well as all over India, especially after the influence of Le Corbusier.\nAfter Independence, the best examples of modern architecture in Delhi include IIT Delhi (1961) by Jugal Kishore Chodhury, Hall of Nations (1972) and Asian Games Village (1982) by Raj Rewal, Palika Kendra building (1984) by Kuldip Singh, and Lotus Temple (1986) by Fariborhz Sahba.\nIn 2017, the demolition of the Hall of Nations received worldwide condemnation from architectural enthusiasts. It was considered to be one of the best examples of modernist architecture in India.\n\n\n== References ==",
  "daily_life_culture": "During the partition of India, around five hundred thousand Hindu and Sikh refugees, mainly from West Punjab migrated to Delhi, whereas around three hundred thousand Muslim residents of the city migrated to Pakistan. Delhi has expanded much since 1947; the small part of it that was constructed during the British period has come to be informally known as Lutyens' Delhi.\nThe States Reorganisation Act, 1956 created the Union Territory of Delhi from its predecessor, the Chief Commissioner's Province of Delhi. The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Act gave Delhi its legislative assembly along Civil lines, though with limited powers.\nDelhi was the primary site in the nationwide anti-Sikh pogroms of 1984, which resulted in the death of around 2,800 people in the city according to government figures, though independent estimates of the number of people killed tend to be higher. The riots were set off by the assassination of Indira Gandhi—the Prime Minister of India at the time—by her Sikh bodyguards.\nIn 2001, the Parliament of India building in New Delhi was attacked by armed militants, killing six security personnel. India suspected Pakistan-based Jihadist militant groups were behind the attack, which caused a major diplomatic crisis between the two countries. There were further terrorist attacks in Delhi in 2005 and 2008, resulting in a total of 92 deaths. In 2020, Delhi witnessed worst communal violence in decades. The riots, caused mainly by Hindu mobs attacking Muslims, 53 people were killed, two-thirds were Muslims, and the rest Hindus.\n\nHinduism is Delhi's predominant religious faith, with 81.68% of Delhi's population, followed by Islam (12.86%), Sikhism (3.40%), Jainism (0.99%), Christianity (0.87%), and Buddhism (0.11%). Other minority religions include Zoroastrianism, Baháʼísm and Judaism.\n\nDelhi's culture has been influenced by its lengthy history and historic association as the capital of India. Although a strong Punjabi Influence can be seen in language, dress and cuisine brought by the large number of refugees who came following the partition in 1947 the recent migration from other parts of India has made it a melting pot. This is exemplified by many significant monuments in the city. The Archaeological Survey of India recognises 1,200 heritage buildings and 175 monuments as national heritage sites.\nIn the Old City, the Mughals and the Turkic rulers constructed several architecturally significant buildings, such as the Jama Masjid—India's largest mosque built in 1656 and the Red Fort. Three World Heritage Sites—the Red Fort, Qutub Minar and Humayun's Tomb—are located in Delhi. Other monuments include the India Gate, the Jantar Mantar—an 18th-century astronomical observatory—and the Purana Qila—a 16th-century fortress. The Laxminarayan Temple, Akshardham temple, Gurudwara Bangla Sahib, the Baháʼí Faith's Lotus Temple and the ISKCON temple are examples of modern architecture. Raj Ghat and associated memorials houses memorials of Mahatma Gandhi and other notable personalities. New Delhi houses several government buildings and official residences reminiscent of British colonial architecture, including the Rashtrapati Bhavan, the Secretariat, Rajpath, the Parliament of India and Vijay Chowk. Safdarjung's Tomb is an example of the Mughal gardens style. Some regal havelis (palatial residences) are in the Old City. Lotus Temple is a Baháʼí House of Worship completed in 1986. Notable for its flowerlike shape, it serves as the Mother Temple of the Indian subcontinent and has become a prominent attraction in the city. The National Museum and National Gallery of Modern Art are some of the largest museums in the country. Other museums in Delhi include the National Museum of Natural History, National Rail Museum and National Philatelic Museum.\nChandni Chowk, a 17th-century market, is one of the most popular shopping areas in Delhi for jewellery and Zari saris. Delhi's arts and crafts include, Zardozi—an embroidery done with gold thread—and Meenakari—the art of enamelling.\n\nDelhi's association and geographic proximity to the capital, New Delhi, has amplified the importance of national events and holidays like Republic Day, Independence Day (15 August) and Gandhi Jayanti. On Independence Day, the Prime Minister addresses the nation from the Red Fort. The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's cultural diversity and military strength. Over the centuries, Delhi has become known for its composite culture, and a festival that symbolises this is the Phool Walon Ki Sair, which takes place in September. Flowers and pankhe—fans embroidered with flowers—are offered to the shrine of the 13th-century Sufi saint Khwaja Bakhtiyar Kaki and the Yogmaya Temple, both situated in Mehrauli.\nReligious festivals include Diwali (the festival of lights), Mahavir Jayanti, Guru Nanak's Birthday, Raksha Bandhan, Durga Puja, Holi, Lohri, Chauth, Krishna Janmastami, Maha Shivratri, Eid ul-Fitr, Moharram and Buddha Jayanti. The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night, with the Qutub Minar as a backdrop. Other events such as Kite Flying Festival, International Mango Festival and Vasant Panchami (the Spring Festival) are held every year in Delhi. The Auto Expo, Asia's largest auto show, is held in Delhi biennially. The New Delhi World Book Fair, held biennially at the Pragati Maidan, is the second-largest exhibition of books in the world. Delhi is often regarded as the \"Book Capital\" of India because of high readership. India International Trade Fair (IITF), organised by ITPO is the biggest cultural and shopping fair of Delhi which takes place in November each year and is visited by more than 1.5 million people.\n\nAs India's national capital and centuries old Mughal capital, Delhi influenced the food habits of its residents and is where Mughlai cuisine originated. Along with Indian cuisine, a variety of international cuisines are popular among the residents. This variety of cuisines created a unique style of cooking which became popular throughout the world, with dishes such as Kebab, biryani, tandoori. The city's classic dishes include butter chicken, dal makhani, shahi paneer, aloo chaat, chaat, dahi bhalla, kachori, gol gappe, samosa, chole bhature, chole kulche, gulab jamun, jalebi and lassi.\nThe fast living habits of Delhi's people has motivated the growth of street food outlets. A trend of dining at local dhabas is popular among the residents. High-profile restaurants have gained popularity in recent years, among the popular restaurants are the Karim Hotel, the Punjab Grill and Bukhara. The Gali Paranthe Wali (the street of fried bread) is a street in Chandni Chowk particularly for food eateries since the 1870s. Almost the entire street is occupied by fast food stalls or street vendors. Other Indian cuisines are also available in this area even though the street specialises in north Indian food.\n\nPrivate schools in Delhi—which use either English or Hindi as the language of instruction—are affiliated to one of three administering bodies, the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE) or the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). In 2004–05, approximately 1,529,000 students were enrolled in primary schools, 822,000 in middle schools and 669,000 in secondary schools across Delhi. Female students represented 49% of the total enrolment. The same year, the Delhi government spent between 1.58% and 1.95% of its gross state domestic product on education.\nSchools and higher educational institutions in Delhi are administered either by the Directorate of Education, the NCT government or private organisations. In 2006, Delhi had 165 colleges, five medical colleges and eight engineering colleges, seven major universities and nine deemed universities.\nThe premier management colleges of Delhi such as Faculty of Management Studies (Delhi) and Indian Institute of Foreign Trade rank the best in India. All India Institute of Medical Sciences Delhi is a premier medical school for treatment and research. National Law University, Delhi is a prominent law school and is affiliated with the Bar Council of India. The Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi situated in Hauz Khas is a premier engineering college of India and ranks as one of the top institutes in South Asia.\nDelhi Technological University, Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and National Law University are the only state universities. University of Delhi, Jawaharlal Nehru University and Jamia Millia Islamia are the central universities, and Indira Gandhi National Open University is for distance education. As of 2008, about 16% of all Delhi residents possessed at least a college graduate degree.\nAccording to the Directorate of Education and GNCTD the following languages are taught in schools in Delhi under the three-language formula:\n\nFirst language: Hindi, Urdu, English\nSecond language: English\nThird language: Urdu, Punjabi, Bengali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kannada, Gujarati, Marathi, Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic"
}