{
  "political_security": "",
  "economy_trade": "Located in Patna division, this Nagar Panchayat type of municipal council mainly depends upon tourism and is supplemented by agriculture. A number of resorts and hotels are located in Rajgir to serve the tourists. In addition, Rajgir is located near the tourist spots like Nalanda, Pawapuri and Kundalpur. \nRajgir ranks top in Bihar, in reference to revenue collected by tourism.\n\nAn ordinance factory for defence forces is located in the city.\nRajgir is also home to Bihar Police Academy.\nRTC CRPF – Rajgir is also home to the Recruit Training centre of the Central Reserve Police Force for three states namely Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal.\nGovernment of Bihar has acquired 100 acres of land to build an IT city near Nalanda university and also develop India's first multimedia hub which will provide advanced courses in different spheres of IT.\nRajgir Film City is an integrated film studio complex. Spread over 20 acres, it is the second largest integrated film city in Bihar. It is being built by the Bihar government since 2017.",
  "architecture": "A Śvētāmbara Jaina temple located at the foothills of Rājagṛha, this temple is also known as \"Gāon Mandira\" (village temple). It spans 8,007 sq. ft. of area and its spire reaches a maximum height of 87 ft., including the flagstaff. The spire features 85 decorative kalaśas. The principal deity of this temple is a black-coloured stone idol of Munisuvrata. The idol was installed in 1447 CE by Jinadāsa, a lay follower, and features sculptures of demi-gods performing ritualistic bathing of the idol, and of attendant demi-gods. It also features lions carved at the base of the idol. The temple was renovated thrice - first time in 1763 CE by Manekchandbhai of Hooghly, the second time in 1961 CE by Devasibhai of Jharia, and the third time in 2008. A new 9.1 ft. tall idol of Munisuvrata was installed by Ācārya Kailāśasāgarasūri in 1961 CE. Apart from these idols, it also features ancient idols of Rishabhanatha (dated to 1447 CE and brought from Suvarṇagiri, the 4th hill), and Shantinatha (dated to 1447 CE and brought from Ratnagiri, the 2nd hill). The idol of Rishabhanatha features long locks of hair in accordance with the beliefs of Śvetāmbara Jainas as described in Ācārya Hemacandrasūri's Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacaritra. An undated (possibly 15th century CE) idol of Pārśvanātha (brought from Udayagiri, the 3rd hill) is also present here. In 2008, an idol of Mahavira was consecrated by Ācārya Muktiprabhasūri in the underground cellar of the temple.",
  "daily_life_culture": "The town is also notable in Jainism and Buddhism. It was the birthplace of the 20th Jain Tirthankar Munisuvrata, and is closely associated with the Mahavira and Gautama Buddha. Both Mahavira and Buddha taught their beliefs in Rajgir during the 6th and 5th century BC, and the Buddha was offered a forest monastery here by the king Bimbisara. As such, the city of Rajgir became one of the Buddha's most important preaching locations.\n\nBimbisara, ruler of Haryanaka Dynasty\nAjatashatru, ruler of Haryanaka Dynasty\nUdayin, ruler of Haryanaka Dynasty\nSariputta, one of the two chief disciples of Budhha\nJivaka, a physician and contemporary of Bimbisara and Buddha\nAbhay K, poet, diplomat, editor, translator, ambassador, artist\nSatyadev Narayan Arya, Governor of Tripura, former Governor of Haryana, former 8-time MLA from Rajgir and former Minister of Mines and Geology of Bihar\nJabir Husain, author and former chairperson of Bihar Legislative Council"
}