{
  "political_security": "Warangal (Telugu:  ), also known as Orugallu, is a city in the Indian state of Telangana and the district headquarters of Warangal district. It is the second largest city in Telangana with a population of 811,844 per 2011 Census of India, and spreading over an 406 km2 (157 sq mi). \nWarangal served as the capital of the Kakatiya dynasty which was established in 1163. The monuments left by the Kakatiyas include fortresses, lakes, temples and stone gateways which, in the present, helped the city to become a popular tourist attraction. The Kakatiya Kala Thoranam was included in the emblem of Telangana by the state government and Warangal is also touted as the cultural capital of Telangana.\nIt is one of eleven cities in the country to have been chosen for the Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana scheme by the Government of India. It was also selected as a smart city in the \"fast-track competition\", which makes it eligible for additional investment to improve urban infrastructure and industrial opportunities under the Smart Cities Mission.\nUNESCO has included Warangal in its Global Network of Learning Cities (GNLC) in recognition of the city's outstanding efforts to make lifelong learning a reality for all at the local level.\nThe three urban cities: Kazipet, Hanamkonda and Warangal are together known as Warangal Tri-City. The three cities are connected by the National Highway 163 (Hyderabad–Bhuvanagiri–Warangal–Bhopalpatnam). The major stations are Kazipet Junction railway station and Warangal railway station.\n\nDuring the 160 years of Kakatiya rule between 1163 and 1323 CE, Warangal was referred to by various names like Orugallu, Ekashila Nagaram, or Omatikonda; all these mean a 'single stone', referring to a huge granite boulder present in the Warangal fort. When the Kakatiya dynasty was defeated by Delhi Sultanate in 1323 CE, ruler Juna Khan, Crown Prince of Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq, conquered the city and renamed it as Sultanpur. Later Musunuri Nayaks recaptured Warangal in 1336 CE and named it Orugallu again.\n\nWarangal was the ancient capital of the Kakatiya dynasty. It was ruled by many kings such as Beta Raja I, Prola Raja I, Beta Raja II, Prola Raja II, Rudradeva, Mahadeva, Ganapathideva, Prataparudra and Rani Rudrama Devi who is the only woman to rule over Telugu region. Beta Raja I is the founder of Kakatiya Dynasty and ruled the kingdom for 30 years and was succeeded by his son Prola Raja I who shifted his capital to Hanamkonda.\nDuring the rule of Ganapathideva, the capital was shifted from Hanamkonda to Warangal. Kakatiya Period Inscriptions praised Warangal as the best city within the Telugu region, up to shores of the ocean. The Kakatiyas left many monuments, including a fortress, four massive stone gateways, the Swayambhu temple dedicated to Shiva, and the Ramappa temple situated near Ramappa Lake. The cultural and administrative distinction of the Kakatiyas was mentioned by Marco Polo. After the defeat of Prataparudra II, the Musunuri Nayaks united 72 Nayak chieftains and captured Warangal from Delhi Sultanate and ruled for fifty years. After the demise of the Nayaks, Warangal was part of the Bahmani Sultanate and then the Sultanate of Golconda.\nThe Mughal emperor Aurangzeb conquered Golconda in 1687, and it remained part of the Mughal empire until the southern provinces of the empire split away to become the state of Hyderabad in 1724, which included the Telangana region and some parts of Maharashtra and Karnataka. Hyderabad was annexed to India in 1948, and became an Indian state called Hyderabad state. In 1956, Hyderabad state was partitioned as part of the States Reorganisation Act, and Telangana, the Telugu-speaking region of Hyderabad state, which includes Warangal, became part of Andhra Pradesh. After the Telangana movement, Telangana state was formed on 2 June 2014, Warangal became a part of Telangana State.\n\nAccording to financial data published on the CityFinance Portal of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the Warangal Municipal Corporation reported total revenue receipts of ₹144 crore (US$17 million) and total expenditure of ₹216 crore (US$26 million) in 2022–23. Tax revenue accounted for about 37.5% of the total revenue, while the corporation received ₹0.46 crore in grants during the financial year.\n\nThe urban police district, which is responsible for maintaining law and order in city and agglomerated areas around Warangal was converted into a Police Commissionerate by the state government in 2015. Inspector General will be working as police commissioner who is also given magisterial powers. There are around 71 police stations present under Warangal Police Commissionerate.\n\nAs of 2011 census of India, Warangal is one of the Indian cities that has seen rapid growth of urbanisation from 19%–28%, alongside cities such as Gandhinagar, Kozhikode.\nAgriculture is the main economic activity with irrigation depending mainly on monsoon and seasonal rainfalls. Major crops are paddy, cotton, mango and wheat. Warangal benefits from the Godavari lift irrigation scheme which is designed to lift water from the Godavari river to irrigate drought prone areas in the Telangana region. The city hosts second-biggest grain market of Asia, located in Enumamula. \nInformation Technology is another sector in which the city is making steady progress with its Incubation centre at Madikonda. Recently Tech Mahindra & Cyient have opened their development centres and many other IT majors like Mindtree, quadrant resource will be opening their offices shortly.\nIn 2023, Kone, a leading elevator manufacturer, opened an office in Warangal.\nHealthcare is another important industry in Warangal. The Warangal Multi Super Speciality Hospital is expected to be completed in 2024.\n\nBoth government and private institutions have their presence in the city.  On 2nd September 2022, Warangal joined the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities (GNLC).\n\nThe residents of the city are often referred as Warangalites. The Warangal Fort, Thousand Pillar Temple and the Ramappa Temple are included in the list of World Heritage Sites recognised by UNESCO. Bhadrakali Temple, Padmakshi Temple, Mettu Gutta, Govinda Rajula Gutta, Roman Catholic Diocese of Warangal, Kazipet Dargah, Ursu Gutta, and Erragattu Gutta are the other notable destinations of various religions. Bhadrakali Lake, Waddepally Lake, and Dharmasagar Lake are the water bodies notable for tourism.\n\nBhadrakali Temple lake is being developed into the largest first Geo-Bio-Diversity cultural park in the country, with promenades, historic caves, suspension bridges, natural trails, nesting ground and ecological reserves.\nThe Ministry of Tourism awarded Warangal as the best heritage city, at the National Tourism Awards for the year 2014–2015. This is the third time in a row for the city to get this award.\n\nFestivals in the city include, a floral festival of Bathukamma being celebrated by women of the city, worshiping the goddess with different flowers for nine days. The women carry their Bathukamma to the nearest temple of their locality, then they clap, sing and dance rhythmically around the Bathukamma. Along with Bathukamma, Bonalu is also declared as a state festival on 15 June 2014. Other festivals are, Sammakka Saralamma Jatara (Medaram Jatara), a popular religious congregation in the honour of Goddess at Medaram of Warangal district.\n\nThe cuisine of the city is mainly of Deccan dishes. Breakfast items include Idli, Dosa, Wada and Puri . Rice with a variety of curries including curd is consumed as the main meal.\n\nAnandhi, film actress\nTharun Bhascker, film director and actor\nChakri, music director\nChandrabose, lyricist\nDaasarathi, poet\nRudrama Devi, the only woman to rule over Telugu region\nManisha Eerabathini, playback singer\nArjun Erigaisi, chess grandmaster\nKothapalli Jayashankar, professor\nManju Latha Kalanidhi journalist\nNand Kishore, cricketer\nNerella Venu Madhav, impressionist and ventriloquist\nPothana, poet\nChukka Ramaiah, educationist\nKaloji Narayana Rao, poet\nP. V. Narasimha Rao, former Prime Minister of India\nEesha Rebba, film actress\nRudradeva (r. c. 1158-1195), the first Kakatiya king who ruled parts of the present-day Telangana and Andhra Pradesh\nPalkuriki Somanatha\nSandeep Reddy Vanga, film director",
  "economy_trade": "",
  "architecture": "Kakatiya architecture was a notable Vesara Architecture Style temple building architecture developed during the rule of the Kakatiya dynasty (1163–1323 CE), in the region comprising present-day Telangana and Andhra Pradesh states of India. The Kakatiya architecture is more significant in Hanamakonda — their first capital and Warangal being their second capital.\nMost of the Kakatiya architecture is influenced from Vesara Architecture Style or Chalukya architecture. It is a fusion of Dravidian architecture and Nagara Bhumija styles in which sandbox technology is used to construct  Vimana—horizontal stepped tower. There are hundreds of monuments in the core of Hanamakonda and Warangal of which Thousand Pillar Temple, Ramappa Temple, Ramappa Lake, Warangal Fort and Kota Gullu are prominent. The Ramappa Temple, also known as the Rudreswara Temple, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site located at Palampet village in Mulugu district, Telangana.\n\nDepending on the geographical location the Kakatiya's used both stones and bricks for the construction of temple complexes, there temple plans are of five main designs; 1) Ekakuta 2) Dwikuta 3) TriKuta 4) Chatuskuta and 5) Panchakuta, depending on its geographical alignment all the main temples are facing east, towards the rising sun following the Vastu shastra. Some of the temples premises also consist of Sabha Mandapa, the Nandi Mandapa, Pakashala, Kalyana Mandapa, Ranga Randapa and Dwara Mandapa.",
  "daily_life_culture": ""
}